I'm fascinated by you and I'm fascinated by anybody who does the kind of
that you do. <laugh> I mean,
please explain to people all the different ultra marathons you've
done and like what you've accomplished.
Yeah. You know, it's, it's interesting because like,
I still kind of see myself as a pretty average runner because as like, um,
I mean,
I competed in high school and made state cross country and state track and that
kind of thing, um, for a small school.
And then I went to a small divisioni school and was, you know, pretty much,
you know, average amongst a real good program at the D three level. And, uh,
I always just did kind like running longer though. So, um,
like once I got done with the college, I, I kind of decided, well, let's,
let's see, what's longer. I think some of those traditional,
like collegiate races of like 5k to 10 kilometers and, uh, you know,
I started kind of just dabbling that stuff. And then in, in 2010,
I think I actually did my first ultra marathon, you know,
partly because I was just like looking around in there,
turned out to be one in the state.
I was li I was living in Wisconsin at the time. And, uh, there was one that, uh,
was kind of in my neck of the woods.
And I actually had just decided to go back to grad school and that one had a,
a thousand dollars prize purse on it. And I was like, you know, what, if I,
if I can win that a thousand bucks go a long way during grad school <laugh>.
So I did that one and I ended up winning it and it, uh, it definitely hooked me.
It was like the type of thing where I was like, I wanna of these. And, um,
by 2011,
I kind of jumped all in at the end of the year and ended three 50 milesers and I
think it was about a, a nine week timeframe. And, uh, <laugh>, that's so crazy.
<laugh> yeah. And I mean, it gets crazier there's,
there's some freaks out there. Um,
there's guys who'll do like a couple and a weekend and stuff like that.
So <laugh>, I mean, it's, it never ends. Um, but yeah, you know,
it was one of those things where after that I was totally hooked. So, uh,
what is it that got you hooked? Um, you know, it,
it had to be partly just a little bit of success, you know,
I wasn't necessarily used to winning, so like, I mean,
I've had good races and good times relative to what you probably see,
like in an average person. And, but, you know,
when I went to like a competitive 5k,
competitive marathon or something like that, um, you know,
I wasn't gonna win unless it was kind of a local race. So kind of finding,
you know, it's like anything,
I guess you kind of gravitate to what you feel you're good at,
and then that kind of peaks your interest. Um, so that was part of it.
The other part was just, uh, I really enjoyed doing the long run.
Like when you break up kind of like a training week,
you have like a variety of different things. You've got like kind of, you know,
base level runs. You've got specific workouts for the distance.
And then most training programs, um, are gonna have a long run once a week.
And that was the one that was always my favorite.
So wrapping my head around doing a bunch of those a week instead of just one
was, was really kind of appealing to me.
And when you're putting that much time into whatever you're training for it's,
I think important to enjoy it.
So being able to kind of enjoy the training process a lot was really appealing
to me. Um, and, uh, and then it's just the variables,
like when you're out there for that long,
there's so many variables to consider and it's like,
it's a blast for me to kind of like work through those plan for those,
and then adjust to them on the fly when you're out there and, you know,
things inevitably go wrong or things pop up that you didn't expect. So it's,
it's, uh, it's just, uh, it's, it's kind of hard to explain, but it's,
it's weird.
One of the things and ultra marathon running that people will always say is
like, they'll have a race. And even if they have a bad race, say like,
I'm never doing one of these again. And then the next day they're on, uh,
on the internet looking for another race. So it's,
there's this weird thing about it that you don't really know until you do it,
but it, it sucks you in <laugh>.
That's the case with a lot of people when they talk about things that are like
that they have to suffer through. Mm-hmm <affirmative>, you know,
I've heard that when guys talk about like those extreme hikes, you know,
when they, you know, like they do that, you know,
that one that goes from Georgia all the way to Maine,
do you know that insane hike? What is that call the Appalation app trail trail.
Yep. Yeah. That they say, I'll never do that again. And then they're like, okay,
what other, what other hikes can I go? It's just, once the pain,
the physical pain dies down.
There's something about that challenge that stimulates in people like you and
people that are into these really long distance things.
Like there's something about distance, there's something about like,
like you were saying, like,
you weren't the best runner in high school or college. Right.
But there's something about the mind of an ultra marathon or it's a different
mind, the per the type of person that can run a hundred miles, 200 miles,
238 miles, those type of people, they're different people. And there's like,
there's a strength,
a mental strength and the ability to just keep going on and on and on that I'm
absolutely fascinated with.
Yeah. You know, and it is interesting too, cuz it's, uh,
the sport's grown a bit, quite a bit in the last decade or so,
but it's still very much kind of a niche.
And then when you kind of hang out in that group,
you start to kind of normalize it a little bit. I think.
So then you start thinking like, oh, a hundred miles. It's just what we do.
And then you, you know,
you actually try to like separate yourself from the fact that you've done a few
of those or separate yourself from the fact that you've been hanging out with
other people of doing it and you realize, oh,
this is actually kind of a weird thing to kind of do as <laugh> as a human.
I mean, nowadays <laugh>, it's.
Very weird. How many of these things have you won?
Uh, I don't know how many I've won it.
It's I think I've done just shy of 50 total now. Um, you know,
everything from 50 kilometers to the furthest I've done is 200 kilometers,
which is about 125 miles. Um, yeah.
I I'd have to look to see how many I've won it. It's, it's, it's really goofy.
Cuz when you start getting into the longer stuff,
like a hundred miles and beyond you start, at least in my training program,
you start to kind of pick smaller races to kind of use as training runs. Um,
and some of it I think is just because for me,
if I'm gonna go out and do like a 30 mile or a 40 mile training run or something
like that,
it's kind of tedious to do that by yourself and then plan all the logistics of
it. So if there's a race nearby and that's not too hard to get to,
it's easier just to sign up for that, go and do that. So some of those,
you know, I'll, I'll win if they're, if they're small enough,
even though I'm not necessarily trying to go for, you know, go all out,
so to speak, cuz I'm hoping to recover kind of and, and get back into training.
Um, so.
You'll pace yourself at, at one of these local races maybe.
Yeah. You know, the way I describe it is, um, and this is,
this is a real hard thing for a lot of people to do. I think it's, uh,
like you go into a race saying this is gonna be a moderately difficult,
long run. Um,
so maybe a little faster than what I would do if I was just gonna do it by
myself, like unsupported, that sort of thing.
And then I always tell myself 80% is the hardest you can go if you want to be
able to come back and start training on time to meet the actual goal or the,
a race. Um, so when I do those, it's like, it's one of those things where like,
you know, who knows someone might show up that's it's like as fast as you,
or maybe a little slower than you normal.
And if they're deciding to just hammer it that day,
they might beat you and you gotta be okay with that. Um, cause.
The competitive part of you flare up though.
For sure. Well, yeah, it does. And that's the hardest part and that's,
I think the main reason why some people won't do that approach mm-hmm
<affirmative> because there's certainly people who just,
they stay away from races unless it's their a race. And they just say I'm,
if I'm gonna do a long run, I'll do it on my own. And, and, and you know,
not do that or, you know,
there's certainly I'm sure folks who do it and then they get caught up and then
end up leaving their, a race out on, on the B race, I guess, so to speak. So,
um, yeah, it, it's interesting. It's, A's kind of a,
a sport that I think is still a lot to learn,
which I think is actually the case for a lot of things that, you know, even,
even things that are well established, you know,
there's always something to learn or new things to pick up on. Well.
It's one of those things, right? Where once,
once someone runs a hundred miles and then a bunch of other people start doing
it, like you said, it, it almost becomes normalized.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> and then people start to try to push that boundary.
Now I' hearing talk about, uh, the woman Candace, who runs the Moab two 40.
Yeah. Mm-hmm <affirmative> yeah.
They're talking about doing a 500 <laugh> I heard that I was like,
you're you're outta your mind. People are gonna die,
but maybe that'll be normal in five years and we'll get used to like four or
five day races.
Yeah. So, so it's really fascinating.
It took me a couple years to do this before I got into the sport.
But once I was, was in it for a couple of years, I kind of did a little,
a little, a little research to see like what the deal was with them,
some of this stuff. And the,
the funny thing is like that type of a distance isn't even unheard of. Uh,
they actually they're. I forget what the book is called,
but they actually had in Madison square garden,
they used to host a six day event where guys in gals, I,
I'm not sure if the gals were doing it back then, but, um,
guys for sure were going there and seeing how far they could run in six days.
And uh, yeah, I know crazy. And uh, I think if I remember right,
they would actually, people were betting on 'em that way.
And so they'd fill it up. Like people would come and watch this like spectacle.
Wow. When, what year was this?
It was in the late 18 hundreds I think is when they started it.
I'm not sure when.
Here it is six day cycling. Yes.
The six day grind Madison squarebook garden probably ran too. Oh, wow.
Look at this man. So some crazy person decided to leave the bike at home.
I guess <laugh> this.
Is super old. We're looking at this on YouTube folks.
It says six day cycling the six day grind at Madison square garden.
And so it's just a track and these people are, this is old, tiny.
These, this looks like the thirties, right? Yeah.
And that guy just went down and so they're,
they're just riding their bike for six days. Oh. When they wipe out,
oh my God. <laugh> they probably had terrible breaks back then, right? Yeah.
That was their feet. <laugh> probably right. Or the railing.
Yeah. Yeah.
So this is so endurance sports. Like this are nothing new.
Yeah. It's actually fascinating when you like, kinda look into it.
Cuz nowadays in the United States,
the trail running scene is definitely way bigger than like the road running or
certainly the track, the track scene. But that wasn't always the case.
If you look back into like the seventies and eighties,
there was a pretty big surge in ultra marathon running, uh, for flat fast stuff.
That's where we see a lot of the, the records coming from.
Um,
so that's like a track and you run as far and long as you can on a track like
track.
Or a road or really flat road.
I had Goggins on David GOs. Oh yeah. Mm-hmm <affirmative> was talking about, uh,
the first time he did one was on a track. Okay. Just ran in circles on a track,
which is almost gotta be more taxing for your mind cuz you're just seeing the
same over and over and over again.
Yeah. It's, it's really fascinating to me cause I've done, I've done both.
I've done a hundred milesers on the trail and I've done a hundred miles on a 400
meter track. And uh, the fascinating thing is it is like what you said,
it's almost a different event where mentally you're doing everything you can on
that track to kind of separate yourself from the actual environment and vision
yourself being somewhere else. You know,
looking forward to little things to kind of not necessarily be thinking too far
in advance cause that can get overwhelming. Whereas when I'm out on the trails,
it's like you're using a pretty pristine,
beautiful area and you can kind of just take it as it comes and say, oh cool.
Now I get to see that.
Or this is a neat area or I like this section and you look,
you look forward to that kind of diversity, whereas on the track, it's,
you know, you see it once and you've seen it every time. Um, and then it,
you know, it just kind of beats you up mentally from that side of things. Um,
but then, you know, there's other things about that too,
that that help out like logistically when you're on a track for 400 meters,
you bring out one person,
you put everything you may possibly want on a little table.
And if I want something I say, Hey, can I get that? And 400 meters later,
I have it. And even, even if we mess it up, I'll get it 400 meters after that.
So <laugh> yeah. Where, whereas, you know, the trails, it depends,
they've gotten a lot better with aid stations as the sports's grown. Um,
but like, you know,
you mess up your aid station or if you get caught up in the moment and just blow
through it and don't take care of yourself,
you might have to suffer for an hour plus before you get help again.
So that's where it kind of gets a little different,
I think logistically when you're on the trails versus versus on the road.
And um, but, but yeah, it's, it's kind of a, a different thing. It,
the track is interesting too, in the,
a sense that you're essentially making that same exact Mo exact motion the whole
way. So like there's certain areas of your body that fatigue, um,
and they don't get a breakcause of the turn, the turn and just running flat,
right? Like running flat.
You're gonna kind of localize some of the way you stimulate your muscles or your
gate is gonna be pretty similar throughout. Whereas when you're on the trails,
like you might be going on a slight incline, a steep incline, a slight decline,
a little bit of flat, some rolling, all kinds of things in between,
and then trails can be kind of undulating.
So you're just kind of moving all that forces around your legs a little more
than you would be when you're running on a flat at surface. So, you know,
it's one of the things that I always tell, like my coaching clients and,
and myself, when I'm planning for something is like,
if you really want to meet your full potential, like specificity as king,
you need to be on that environment in the environment you're gonna race on and
really get your body used to kind of that type of Mo motion. And, um,
it makes it a little more interesting when you're doing a track race cause means
some kind of long runs on a track. So, um,
you're kind of balancing doing just enough to get ready for it and not doing too
much so that when you get to the race, you're like, screw this.
I've done too much of this already. I don't wanna see another loop. Um, yeah,
it's kind of a, an interesting concept.